---
layout: default
title: "Autumn 2020 teaching: Storage System (Nov-Dec, 2020)"
category: news 
tags: whatsnew
permalink: /2020-p1-anp
---
<hr> 
The teaching session continues with the second course of the new academic cycle (2020-2021), [Storage Systems](https://studiegids.vu.nl/en/2020-2021/courses/XM_0092) for Masters students. It is a new course designed by me with the support from Sacheendra Talluri and Giulia Frascaria, and offered for the first time here at VU. 

The goal of the course is to teach students about  the rise of Non-Volatile Memory (NVM) storage technologies in commodity computing, their impact on system design (architecture, operating
system), distributed systems, storage services, and application designs. The topics include 

  * Internals of SSDs, their architecture, design of the FTL layer, garbage collection logic 
  * Advancements in the storage I/O stack of Linux to accommodate the NVM devices 
  * NVM file systems and key value stores 
  * Persistent NVM Memories, persistent heaps and data structures 
  * Programmable Storage 
  * Networked storage (NVMoF), storage disaggregation, cloud storage, distributed transactions systems 

There is a project component in the course, where students will implement their own FTL layer, GC logic, and a Key-Value store on top of it using Open-Channel and LightNVM infrastructure in Linux. TCP/IP networking stack in userspace and provide code for basic socket API calls (socket, connect, send, recv, close) for a TCP stream socket. Their implementation is loaded as a preloaded shared library. 

The course is offered online with zoom lectures, office hours, and canvas support pages. More about online teaching experience to follow. The course material will also be made public in coming weeks. 

